The Role of Strategy in Management
Learning Outcomes
Explain the concept of competitive advantage.
Explain the concept of value proposition.
Explain how strategy relates to the overall management of a business.
Businesses do not exist in isolation. They exist as one element of a complex situation that comprises the social, political, economic, and competitive environment. A firm’s strategy is a comprehensive plan to achieve its goals in the face of these conditions. Strategy defines how a firm will achieve long-term success. Determining the strategy is a critical decision for management because it involves a significant commitment of resources and, once initiated, it is very difficult and costly to change.
In the movie The Godfather II, Michael Corleone says: “My father taught me many things. He taught me: keep your friends close, but your enemies closer.” This applies in strategy, as well. A company’s friends are its customers. Strategy must keep the company aligned with its customers’ needs. Its enemies are its competitors.  Competitors are firms that provide similar products or services and try to attract the same customers. Competitors are likely to have similar business goals in terms of sales, profitability, and market share. To succeed and achieve its goals, a firm has to “beat” its competitors by constantly striving to improve its offerings to customers and to be better than the competitors’ alternatives. In this section we look at how companies address competitors in their strategy.
Competitive Advantage
In a competitive environment, businesses try to stand out from their competitors. Consider the following car companies. Is there a particular characteristic or quality that you associate with each of them?
Porsche
Volvo
Hyundai
Toyota
Ford
Companies try very hard to create a perception that they are different from their competitors. If you are looking for a high-performance sports car you probably won’t go to a Ford dealer. But if you are looking for a durable truck you wouldn’t go to a Porsche dealer. Companies strive to provide a product or service that is distinct, or differentiated, in some way from their competitors. When customers perceive the distinction as being valuable, they will prefer to purchase the business’s product over a competitor’s products. This is called a competitive advantage. Competitive advantage means that the business outperforms its rivals in the market because customers prefer its products or services.
Businesses can achieve competitive advantages in a number of different ways. Their product may provide superior performance; it may be of higher quality; it may be more durable; or it may have unique features. The businesses may provide better customer service or have better availability. They may advertise and promote their products better, or they may offer their products at a lower price. The best businesses provide a combination of unique attributes that competitors cannot match.
Creating Competitive Advantage
Businesses create competitive advantage by doing some things better than their competitors. For example, look at the companies in the chart that follows. By doing some things much better than competitors, the businesses are able to create a valuable distinction for customers.
Company
How Company Creates Distinction
Apple
Research and development: creates new or improved products with leading-edge technology
Nike
Marketing: uses celebrity endorsements to create a powerful brand image
Walmart
Supply chain management: created a highly integrated system to keep supplier costs low and keep products that customers buy on the shelf
Zappos
Customer service: strives to deliver “Wow!” in the customer’s experience
UPS
Logistics: integrates package delivery with customer needs
Zara
Rapid responsiveness: quickly gets the latest styles into stores

It may seem that the best way to create competitive advantage is to do everything well. Unfortunately, this is not possible. Generally, resources are limited and it would be much too costly to try to excel at everything. Businesses that try to do too many things well often don’t succeed at doing anything extremely well and don’t produce distinction. This is referred to as being “stuck in the middle.”
Creating competitive advantage is not the only goal of business. Companies also must be able to maintain their competitive advantage. When competitors see a company is doing something that customers value, they will try to copy it. Some things can be copied quickly. For example, when American Airlines introduced the AAdvantage frequent flier program to reward loyal customers, it was copied within months by Delta, United, and British Airways. Other things are more difficult to copy. Walmart, for example, has created a tightly linked supply chain to provide low costs. No other company has figured out how to duplicate this system. The goal of companies is to create competitive advantage in ways that are difficult or costly for competitors to copy. This is called a sustainable competitive advantage.

Walmart’s supply chain helps to keep its prices low, giving it a competitive advantage over others.
Strategy and Competitive Advantage
Achieving competitive advantage is not likely to be a formal goal of a business. However, having competitive advantage means a company will have resources to pursue its goals. When firms beat their competitors it means they can finance more research and development to improve their products or services; they can spend more on advertising and promotions to attract customers; they can donate to charities to improve community relations; and they can provide greater profits to their owners. In short, competitive advantage is the means to meeting organizational goals.
Because strategy is a plan to achieve long-term goals, we can define strategy as a plan to create sustainable competitive advantage.
Practice Question
The Value Proposition
Companies strive to produce a unique product or service that will give them an advantage in the market place. But this produces competitive advantage only if customers perceive the difference and understand why this difference matters to them. A value proposition is a statement that a company uses to convince customers that its product or service provides more value to them than a competitor’s product or service. The value proposition communicates to the customer the main reason a product or service is the one best suited to their needs.
The value proposition is communicated through a company’s webpage, advertising, or social media. It should have a bold headline or graphic that grabs attention and depicts the benefits delivered to the customer. This brief “announcement” can be followed by a short paragraph or a few bullet points that list the key features of the product.
An excellent example is the value statement for the Apple MacBook. It shows an edge-on image of a MacBook with the caption “MacBook: Light. Years ahead.” This very cleverly conveys the important distinctions of the MacBook. First, it’s a really slick design. In the edge-on view the computer almost disappears. Second, it is light. In the laptop market, weight is important. Both the image and the statement emphasize that the MacBook is easy to carry around. Finally, it emphasizes MacBook’s advanced technology, “Light years ahead.” In a very small space, Apple conveys the main differentiators for the MacBook—its weight and its advanced technology.
Practice Questions
Strategic Management
Strategic management is the process of integrating all the functions and activities in an organization into a coherent whole. We previously defined management as the process of planning, organizing, leading, and controlling people in the organization to effectively use resources to meet organizational goals. Strategy management provides the “glue” that holds these processes together. Rather than looking at individual functions or activities, strategic management considers the entire organization and how the pieces fit together. Good strategic management allows an organization to develop synergy. That is, the pieces support each other so that the total output is greater than the sum of the output of individual functions.
Strategic management best fits with the planning function, and it involves two broad functions. The first is to determine how the company will create competitive advantage. That is, how will the company produce distinction and value to its customers? The answer to this question is the company’s business strategy. Management must make sure that all activities in the company support its business strategy. This is called “doing the right things.” It means everyone must be focused on excelling at the things that create competitive advantage, making sure that resources are allocated to the departments that create competitive advantage, and closely controlling the activities that create competitive advantage. That doesn’t mean they can ignore other things; successful businesses have to do many things well but excel at only a few.
Strategic management’s second function is to make sure that the people in the organization support the strategy. As we discussed previously, almost everything an organization accomplishes is achieved by people doing things. Management must make sure that the people in the organization are willing and capable of excelling at the things that create competitive advantage. This is called “doing things right.” They can do this by providing training and development opportunities for employees to improve skills that support the strategy, by creating a compensation system that rewards behaviors that support the strategy, and by implementing a supervisory system that encourages and recognizes behaviors that support the strategy. Management can also instill a culture of excellence throughout the organization. Organizational culture is the shared values and beliefs that guide individual behaviors in the organization. Managers can induce a culture that supports the strategy by communicating and modeling behaviors and values they want to see throughout the organization.
For example, when Tom’s of Maine introduced a new deodorant that disappointed customers, company founder Tom Chappell pulled the product from the market and reimbursed the customers who had purchased it. The company lost the money it had put into developing and producing the product, as well as the reimbursement cost. But it reinforced the core values of fairness and honesty that the company espoused, and demonstrated that quality and customer satisfaction were the company’s competitive advantage.
In another example, Southwest Airlines’ management implemented the “Walk a Mile” program in which managers and executives pitch in to help front-line employees. Executives clean planes, load luggage, and attend gates. Flight attendants were surprised when Herb Kelleher, the company chairman, showed up to help them provision a plane. This program reinforces the family culture at Southwest, where everyone is valued and considered equal. It also emphasizes the company’s focus on customer service by demonstrating that everyone has to support activities that directly affect the customer.
Practice Question
Industry Analysis
The purpose of strategic management is to create competitive advantage. But how do companies know they have competitive advantage? In the long term, competitive advantage will lead to greater profitability. But in the shorter term, it is difficult for companies to assess how well they are creating competitive advantage. An industry analysis is a method for a company to assess its market position relative to its competitors. An industry analysis is meant to help a company review various market and financial factors in its industry that affect the business, including evaluating the competition. This analysis helps managers understand the important factors of the marketplace and how these factors may be used to gain a competitive advantage. Industry analyses are an important tool for companies to assess their strategy in a shorter time frame.
Because conditions in the business environment are constantly changing, industry analyses need to be done periodically to keep up with developments. This can be a very time-consuming process and, if not done accurately, can lead to bad strategic decisions. For this reason, managers may go to outside firms, either to produce the analysis or to provide data for the company to complete an analysis. A number of companies exist that maintain huge databases of information about particular industries, such as Hoovers and IBIS. These companies have methods for gathering the data and for analyzing the data to produce reports.
Candela Citations
CC licensed content, Original
Role of Strategy in Management. Authored by: John/Lynn Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Walmart's Aerodynamic Trucks. Authored by: Walmart. Located at: https://www.flickr.com/photos/walmartcorporate/5261662028/. License: CC BY: Attribution
Common Frameworks for Evaluating the Business Environment
Learning Outcomes
Explain environmental scanning and the PESTEL checklist for a company’s general environment.
Explain the impact of Porter’s “five forces” on industry profits.
Explain competitor analysis.

Starting a new business without evaluating the competitive environment is risky, indeed.
Introduction
The environment is always changing, and this is just as true for the business environment as it is for the physical world around us. Managers try to avoid being “taken by surprise” by unexpected events that would impact their organizations through an ongoing process called environmental scanning. Environmental scanning is a high-level, broad-based process of gathering, analyzing, and dispensing information for the purpose of developing strategies or tactics. The process entails getting both factual data and qualitative opinions. Organizations also scan when they are considering whether to enter a particular industry.
PESTEL

The PESTEL framework organizes information gathered from environmental scans.
You may wonder just how you go about analyzing the total external environment that would affect your company. A commonly used management tool is called PESTEL.
PESTEL is an organizing framework that allows decision makers to understand and make connections with a mass of information. You may sometimes see the name of this tool written as PESTLE or even just PEST in older sources. A PESTEL analysis examines six key macro-environmental factors in order to understand their interactions with the organization.
Besides alerting top management to potential threats in the environment, a PESTEL analysis is a part of the external strategic analysis when conducting research into new markets. It gives an overview of the different macro-environmental factors that the company has to take into consideration. Descriptions of the six key PESTEL factors follow.
Political
Political issues are a function of how much the government intrudes or is involved in an organization’s operations. In particular, it looks at taxation and tariffs, regulations, political stability, and elections. For example, Google and other Internet providers have financial, legal, and ethical issues relating to operating in countries like China or Iran, where repressive governments want to control the flow of information. In another example, Google was fined $2.7 billion by the European Union for antitrust abuses. Google can appeal this decision with the European Court of Justice. Finally, the CEO of Apple is awaiting changes in the tax law before bringing almost $250 billion in foreign reserves back to the United States. Often, decision makers for these organizations must choose between making money or suppressing information critical of the repressive regimes.
Economic
Economic factors start with indicators for the U.S. economy as a whole. These are growth, employment, inflation, and interest rates. Companies with foreign operations will worry about exchange rates. These factors are important in long-range forecasts for revenue and expenses. Businesses in the financial industry may pull back from aggressive strategies in times of rising interest rates.
Social
Society and culture have great impacts on the business environment. These factors include demographics like population growth, age distribution, and attitudes toward safety and health consciousness. For example, rising rates of obesity have forced management to look closely at marketing campaigns in giant food corporations such as Nestle and Kraft Foods.
Technological
Technology facts include research and development (R&D), automation and robotics, and technology incentives. The rate of technological change in the business environment is staggering. A term often paired with technology is disruption, a description for innovations that completely change the cast of leading competitors in an industry. Many organizations not only scan the technological environment but also monitor closely for new and disruptive processes. Walt Disney and Alphabet (Google’s parent corporation) are both investing heavily to become leaders in virtual reality. They are betting billions that augmented reality will have the power to disrupt the gaming and entertainment industries.
Environmental
Weather, climate change, air quality, and natural disasters are all environmental factors. Some industries are especially at risk from changes in the natural environment, including manufacturing, agriculture, tourism and travel, and sports and entertainment. Many pollution regulations limiting water and air pollution have been passed that affect the operation of businesses. Today, the impact of climate control is being debated in Congress, and organizations in many industries are concerned how this latest environmental threat will affect their operations. Recently, Shell Oil spent more than $7 billion exploring parts of the Arctic Circle for oil—a venture that was not possible before global warming increased drilling access in the area. They have since cancelled this initiative due to a lack of results, as well as strong international protests that it may cause further damage to an environmentally sensitive location.
Legal
Legal factors include discrimination laws, consumer protection laws, and employment, health, and safety policies. Antitrust, piracy and copyright laws, as well as immigration issues are also of growing importance in the business environment. All of these factors affect how organizations operate, their costs, and the demand for products. For example, after the collapse of Enron, the government passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002. This legislation completely changed accounting and reporting requirements for corporations. These businesses have had to implement rigorous procedures to ensure compliance with the new regulations. After the Great Recession of 2008–2009, Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Act, which greatly increased regulations and oversight for banks and other financial firms. Bank lobbyists slowed the implementation of many rules, but compliance costs doubled and totaled $70 billion in 2016.
Practice Question
Porter’s Five Forces
Michael Porter, a well-known business consultant and professor at Harvard University, identified five critical external factors that affect strategies being developed by organizations in any industry. This system, known as Porter’s Five Forces, has become an important management strategy tool. Managers use the tool to examine opportunities and threats and to facilitate decision making in the context of their company’s external environment. It measures the competitiveness of an industry and thus its attractiveness or potential profitability. An unattractive industry is one in which the combination of these five forces acts to drive down overall profitability.

The five forces defined by Porter include:
The threat of new entrants (or barriers to entry). This refers to the threat that new competitors pose to the existing businesses in an industry. A profitable industry will attract new competitors. If it is easy for new businesses to enter the industry, then the businesses already operating in the industry are at a greater risk. There may be a high threat of new entrants to an industry when brand names are not well-known, when it is easy for customers to switch to a new supplier, and when trademarks or copyrights are not involved in the production process. For example, it would be very hard to enter an industry such as airlines, which requires a huge financial investment to pay for equipment, personnel, and airport gateways.
The threat of substitute products or services. A substitute product is not a similar product from a competitor, but rather a different product or service altogether but that performs the same purpose in the mind of the consumer. For example, a city subway system could be a substitute product to an automobile manufacturer. Likewise, e-mails may substitute for writing letters, olive oil may be a butter substitute, and tea may substitute for coffee. If there are good substitutes to a product, the industry is less profitable.
Competitive rivalry within the industry. Porter believes that the intensity or the level of competition in an industry is one of the main forces that determines the profitability of that industry. A highly competitive market suggests that the competitors are aggressively trying to take market share from their rivals. Intensity can be affected by the number of competitors, the size of the market, the growth of the industry, and how difficult it is to differentiate your product (make it unique in some major feature). The airline and automotive industries are examples of high rivalry industries.
The bargaining power of buyers. Buyer bargaining power refers to the amount of pressure customers can put on a seller. The buyer wants to lower prices, increase service, or improve the quality of the product. From the viewpoint of the seller, an industry where the buyer has high bargaining power is not particularly attractive because competitors will have many possible strategies for easily taking the customer away. High buying bargaining power decreases potential profits if the seller responds to the buyers’ tactics. Remember that the buyer is not always a consumer; many businesses sell to other businesses who also have buyer bargaining power. A company like Walmart has a lot of buyer bargaining power because of the extremely high volume of its purchases.
The bargaining power of suppliers. Supplier bargaining power is another force that shapes the competitive measure of an industry because it limits the ability of the seller to make a profit. Powerful suppliers can pressure buyers by raising prices, lowering quality, or reducing the availability of the supply.
An important thing to remember about Porter’s Five Forces is that it is useful at an industry level and not for groups or segments of a market. It is also a “snapshot” of what the industry looks like at a particular time and needs to be updated regularly. And as with any management tool, it is not perfect and infallible. When considered as a starting point for discussion and further investigation, however, Porter’s Five Forces is very useful.
Practice Question
Competitive Analysis
Earlier in this module, you read about the concept of competitive advantage. You learned that knowing the strengths and weaknesses of your competitors are key elements in devising organizational goals and determining strategies to meet the goals.
Once the external business environment has been analyzed for its suitability, industry competitors must be profiled to determine who your specific competitors are. Not all “players” in an industry will be in direct competition with your organization. (You don’t want to spend valuable resources on an in-depth competitive analysis of BMW and Mercedes if you sell Hyundais.) A robust competitive analysis will allow you to focus on those companies that will compete for customers in your target market.
A competitive analysis looks at competitors and tries to answer such questions as these in the following categories:
General Background: Who are my competitors? Where are they located? Who are the key personalities? What type of organizational structure is it?
Financial: How profitable are they? Have they grown in the recent past? And any other data you can ethically discover.
Products: What products do they sell? Have they introduced new products and what is their success rate? What brands do they carry? Do they hold patents and licenses?
Customers: What market segment do they serve? What is the customer growth rate? How strong is the customer loyalty?
Advertising and Sales: What are their distribution channels? What is their promotional strategy? How large is their sales force? What is their pricing and discount structure?
Personnel: How many employees do they have? What is their compensation package including benefits? What kind of managers and what management style do they show? More importantly, what skills is the competition hiring? If a company is hiring experts in artificial intelligence, it tells the competition quite a bit about the plans for the future.
There are many more questions that would be relevant to this kind of in-depth analysis. The more you know about your competition, the better prepared you will be when you go up against it. The next section will identify industry components that affect your ability to operate. It will introduce tools that allow organizations to focus on only the specific internal and external features that affect them.
Practice Question
Candela Citations
CC licensed content, Original
Frameworks for Evaluating the Business Environment. Authored by: John/Lynn Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Open sign. Authored by: wndj. Located at: https://pixabay.com/en/sign-open-open-sign-business-store-1781609/. License: CC0: No Rights Reserved
Porters five forces. Authored by: Grahams Child; Modification by Lumen Learning. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Porters_five_forces.PNG. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Common Frameworks for Situational Analysis
Learning Outcomes
Differentiate among five components of industry environment: customers, competitors, suppliers, regulations, and advocacy groups.
Explain SWOT.
Explain the resource-based view of strategy.
After the macro, or PESTEL, level analysis has been completed, the next step in goal setting is to do a situational analysis that looks more closely at external and internal conditions that affect your particular organization. Five key components of the organization’s specific business environment are examined. These are customers, competitors, suppliers, and government and legal issues—including regulations and advocacy or support groups. The analysis looks at what impact these factors may have on a specific organization or business.
Customers

Customer analysis should answer questions such as: Who is your target customer today? How will you retain your customers?
A customer analysis is a critical component of any organizational strategy. You probably would not want to open an extreme sports adventure business in a city where the age of the typical resident is older than fifty. Or, you might be wasting your marketing dollars advertising trendy, designer jeans on the Hallmark TV channel. You might do very well, however, if you opened a combination coffee/book store in a busy college town. If an organization doesn’t know who its customers are or what its customers want, it can’t meet customer needs.
Some of the things a customer analysis should do is to:
Identify the target customer. Is this customer base growing or is it decreasing? What are your customer demographics (age, income, location, gender, politics, etc.)? What is the revenue of these customers? How much discretionary income do they have?
Understand the specific customer needs. Why do they buy certain brands? How do make their purchasing decisions? Do they purchase in person or online?
Show if and how your product or service meets those needs.
Besides determining if a customer base exists in the region, this data can be used in the future to plan effective promotional campaigns, forecast inventory needs, and determine the optimal combination of distribution channels.
Competitors
You read about competitive analysis in the previous section at the macro level. At the situational level, a business needs to identify its specific competitors and assess their potential for taking market share. An organization needs to be aware of future initiatives of the competition (as much as is possible) and examine the competitors’ financial and marketing performances.
Suppliers
Another industry component that will greatly impact an organization is its suppliers. Your business may start by buying raw materials and producing finished goods purchased directly by consumers. Or it may process raw materials into products that are part of another company’s final consumer goods. Some organizations create services rather than goods but still need materials, such as computer software and hardware or office supplies, to provide those services. Whatever the situation, without raw materials or support products, the organization cannot operate.
In the past, it was common for an organization to choose suppliers that were in the same region or at least the same country. In today’s competitive global economy, however, a supplier is likely on the other side of the world. The supply chain is a system comprised of organizations, information, resources, people, technology, and activities that bring products or services from a supplier to a consumer. In larger organizations, entire departments may be dedicated to supply chain logistics. Implementing cooperative alliances with key suppliers is also a popular tactic employed by strategic organizations. Although multiple sources of supply helps to guarantee the availability of supplies, creating a cooperative agreement with one supplier can significantly reduce costs. How to handle suppliers is an extremely important factor in setting goals and generating strategies.
Regulations
Governmental and legal environment are part of the PESTEL analysis discussed in the previous section. At the situational level, however, state and local regulations also need to be part of any analysis. The regulatory burden depends largely upon the type of industry and the specific nature of the business. In some industries, regulation is the single biggest uncertainty affecting investment and spending, corporate image, and risk management. These organizations include airlines, utilities, railways, telecommunications, banking, and pharmaceuticals. Often, the regulations have positive impacts on both consumers and businesses. They provide the public with a high level of confidence in the safety and efficacy of the products. They can also prevent competition from businesses with substandard and low-quality goods from trying to enter an industry. Despite the benefits that regulations can provide, any changes in how the product is manufactured, shipped, tested, or provided will greatly affect unit costs and profit margins.
Regulations are lighter for less risky products and businesses, but every company must comply with federal and state payroll, benefits, tax requirements, and following municipal commercial and building codes can present challenges. For example, a decision to expand the size of a fitness center to attract more customers may be thwarted by a local regulation that fixes a ratio of parking spaces to square footage. Or extra time could be added to delivery schedules if truckers must avoid more direct routes to comply with weight regulations on local highways. Some localities will not permit the shipping of dangerous chemicals through their towns. These factors all affect an organization’s ability to be competitive.
Regulations are a greater burden on small companies unless they are exempted because of size (some companies with fewer than twenty-five employees are exempt from overtime pay provisions, for example.) However, dealing with regulations can be challenging regardless of the size of the organization. Complying with regulations often involves a trade-off between short-term profits and long-term public relations and social responsibility.
Advocacy Groups
Advocacy groups are also known as special interest groups, public interest groups, environmental groups, or political support groups. Whatever their label, their aim is to influence public opinion, public policy, and company behavior. Advocacy groups use a variety of strategies and tactics to draw attention to their causes, including lobbying, promotions using celebrities, and public information campaigns. They provide a type of check on the business community by exposing unethical or unpopular practices. The Internet—especially social media—has greatly strengthened the ability of these groups to impact an organization.
Advocacy groups represent political, economic, and social interests—all of which affect the business environment. (The PESTEL analysis in a previous section looked at the macro effect of these groups.) Today environmental interest groups are extremely varied, and many hold conflicting views about appropriate strategies for pursuing their interests.
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) is one of the more outspoken activist groups and has targeted many organizations it believes abuse animals. In 2016, after years of PETA campaigns aimed at publicizing its marine operations, SeaWorld announced that it would end its orca whale breeding program. In 2017, a combination of low ticket sales and adverse publicity on the general condition of circus animals led Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus to close after almost a century and a half. PETA had filed more than 130 formal complaints against the circus with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Regardless of criticisms that some advocacy group charges are not scientifically sound, negative publicity alone may be enough to disrupt business.
Practice Question
SWOT: A Situational Analysis Summary

The organization puts together its vision and mission with the SWOT analysis to set its goals.
Once external factors have been thoroughly considered, an organization can look at its own internal resources. A SWOT analysis is a method that examines the internal strengths and weaknesses of an organization as well as external opportunities and threats (social, political, economic, legal environmental) that would affect that organization. In fact, a SWOT analysis is really more of a summary of data from various other analyses formulated in a way that allows for comparisons. SWOT stands for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats.
Strengths are the areas where the organization has particular skills and resources that would allow it to pursue goals effectively. For instance, innovative and collaborative organizational cultures are strengths of Apple and Google.
Weaknesses are areas where the organization is lacking resources and would be prevented from pursuing some goals. For example, when consumers demanded smaller, fuel-efficient cars, many American manufacturers lacked the designs and equipment to make these cars.
Opportunities are conditions that are favorable to the organization and would facilitate its efforts to achieve its goals. Building on the earlier example, Japanese automakers saw an opportunity in the American demand for smaller cars to increase their market share.
Threats are conditions that would prevent the organization from achieving its goals. Many businesses, for instance, are concerned about the threat posed by China’s competitive growing manufacturing capability.
PRactice Question
Resource-based View (RBV) Strategic Approach
The resource-based view (RBV) argues that focusing on an organization’s strengths is essential to achieve a sustained competitive advantage. (Remember, the purpose of the SWOT analysis is to help companies identify their strengths.) RBV supporters look for ways to use internal resources (assets) to take advantage of external opportunities. To understand RBV, resources are classified into two groups: tangible and intangible.
Tangible assets are physical things such as land, equipment and machines, and real estate. Although they are necessary, they aren’t unique and competitors can fairly easily acquire these kinds of assets.
Intangible assets are anything an organization can own that is not physical. Examples include brand names, intellectual property, and the organization’s reputation and goodwill. These kinds of assets are not easily acquired and usually contribute heavily toward a sustained competitive advantage. For example, Mercedes Benz has a reputation for quality engineering and luxury in its vehicles. People take it as a given that they produce precision, high-quality products
Practice Question
The VRIO Framework
 In 1991, J.B. Barney developed the VRIN framework to analyze a firm’s internal resources and capabilities to see if they can be used to sustain a competitive advantage. A few years later, he later revised VRIN to VRIO, the current model. VRIO stands for the four key characteristics that a resource must have if it is to produce sustained competitive advantage.
Valuable. A resource is valuable if it enables the company to take advantage of opportunities or defend against threats. A valuable resource allows the company to provide value for its customers by making its product better or cheaper. It means the company can continue to add features or lower the price to maintain the perceived value.
Rare. If only one or two companies can acquire a resource it is considered rare. A resource may be rare because little of it exists, such as workers with particular skills, or because there are few sources for it, such as lithium for batteries. Rare and valuable resources can create a temporary competitive advantage because even if other firms duplicate performance, they don’t have access to the unique resource (tangible or intangible, such as a patent or unique skill). If the resource is not rare, the best a company can achieve is competitive parity (equality).
Inimitable. If another organization can’t copy, buy, or find a replacement for the resource, it is inimitable. According to Barney, resources can be inimitable if they (1) developed historically over a long period of time, (2) competitors cannot identify the particular resources that are the cause of competitive advantage, and (3) the resource is a result of the corporate culture and personal dynamics of the organization.
Organized to capture value. The three characteristics listed earlier are “necessary but not sufficient conditions” to achieve a sustained competitive advantage. The missing ingredient is management’s ability to develop the strategy to put it all together. The firm must be organized in a way that can capture value by employing the right strategies.
The VRIO and the SWOT analyses are tools that help companies organize to successfully achieve sustained competitive advantages.
Candela Citations
CC licensed content, Original
Common Frameworks for Situational Analysis. Authored by: John/Lynn Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Young Girl. Authored by: ellemclin. Located at: https://pixabay.com/en/child-with-braids-braids-937658/. License: CC0: No Rights Reserved
SWOT analysis diagram in English language. Authored by: Xhienne. Provided by: Wikimedia; Modification by Lumen Learning. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:SWOT_en.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Stages and Types of Strategy
Learning Outcomes
Explain the stages of strategy.
Explain Porter’s general types of competitive strategies.
Explain e-commerce strategy.
The previous sections have examined the role of strategy in management and looked at common frameworks for analyzing the external and internal environment of business organizations. But what are the specific steps in the strategic management process? How do managers decide what to do, when to do it, and make sure it is happening the way they want? This is what the strategic management process is all about.
The Strategic Management Process
The strategic management process consists of three, four, or five steps depending upon how the different stages are labeled and grouped. But all of the approaches include the same basic actions in the same order. A brief description of these steps follows:
Strategic Objectives and Analysis. The first step is to define the vision, mission, and values statements of the organization. This is done in combination with the external analysis of the business environment (PESTEL) and internal analysis of the organization (SWOT). An organization’s statements may evolve as information is discovered that affects a company’s ability to operate in the external environment.
Strategic Formulation. The information from PESTEL and SWOT analyses should be used to set clear and realistic goals and objectives based on the strengths and weaknesses of the company. Identify if the organization needs to find additional resources and how to obtain them. Formulate targeted plans to achieve the goals. Prioritize the tactics most important to achieving the objectives. Continue to scan the external environment for changes that would affect the chances of achieving the strategic goals.
Strategic Implementation. Sometimes referred to as strategic execution, this stage is when the planning stops and the action begins. The best plans won’t make up for sloppy implementation. Everyone in the organization should be aware of his or her particular assignments, responsibilities and authority. Management should provide additional employee training to meet plan objectives during this stage, as well. It should also allocate resources, including funding. Success in this stage depends upon employees being given the tools needed to implement the plan and being motivated to make it work.
Strategic Evaluation and Control. Because external and internal conditions are always changing, this stage is extremely important. Performance measurements (determined by the nature of the goal) will help determine if key milestones are being met. If actual results vary from the strategic plan, corrective actions will need to be taken. If necessary, reexamine the goals or the measurement criteria. If it becomes apparent that the strategy is not working according to plan, then new plans need to be formulated (see Step 2) or organizational structures adjusted. Personnel may need to be retrained or shifted to other duties. You may even have to repeat the strategic management process from the beginning, including the information and knowledge gained from this first attempt.

The graphic depicts the basic steps of the strategic management process. Note that analysis, decision making, and action happen in all of the steps and throughout the process.
Practice Question
Porter’s Competitive Strategies
The strategic management process described earlier can be successfully used for a wide number of business strategies. In practice, however, most organizations develop strategies that focus on the competition.
Besides studying the nature of industry profits in the Five Forces Theory, Michael Porter is also recognized for his work on four general types of competitive strategies. (More recently, a fifth strategy has been added.) Porter’s model describes two ways of achieving competitive advantage, either by differentiation or by cost. It also identifies two ways of targeting the market, by focusing on a particular market segment or appealing to the overall (broad) market. This approach results in four separate competitive strategies: overall differentiation, overall low cost, focused differentiation, and focused low cost. The fifth strategy combines elements of both low cost and differentiation. This is called the integrated approach.

Porter classified competitive strategies by cost and differentiation, with a focused or broad market scope. He later recognized a fifth (integrated) classification.
Low Price Leadership Strategy
An organization seeking a low-cost strategy seeks to become a leader in providing low-cost products to its customers. The strategy is to produce (or purchase) comparable value goods or services at a lower cost than its competitors. The lower cost will attract the majority of customers and allow it to profit by the volume of goods sold. For this strategy to be successful, it requires that only one or two companies can be industry leaders in this position. For example, Walmart and Costco are leaders in the overall low-cost strategy. IKEA is a low-cost leader using a focused low-cost strategy, appealing to a particular segment of the overall market.
ADVANTAGES OF LOW-COST STRATEGY
DISADVANTAGES OF LOW COST-STRATEGY
Reduces buyer bargaining power
Lack of differentiation/value in products and services
Forces out less efficient rivals
Some methods can be easily copied
Makes it hard for new entrants to compete
Focus on cost cutting decreases investment in key activities

Differentiation Leadership Strategy
A strategy based on differentiation (distinction) calls for goods and services that offer unique features and that have high value for the target customer. The features must be perceived by the customer to be so much better than what the competition offers that they are worth an additional cost.
The differentiation may be based on the total number of features, quality of the features, customer service, or other criteria. Marketing campaigns are one way to differentiate a product and create a strong emotional attachment to it, supporting premium prices. Examples of companies in the overall market scope that pursue an overall differentiated strategy include Sony and Apple. They produce a large number of quality products that appeal to the wide technology consumer market. Businesses that sell luxury goods in any industry are employing a focused differentiation strategy. Prada, BMW, and Rolex are all companies whose strategy depends upon maintaining a loyal customer base convinced of the superior quality and uniqueness of their products—and who are also willing to pay a premium for the perceived quality value.
Differentiation Strategy Advantages and Disadvantages
ADVANTAGES OF DIFFERENTIATION STRATEGY
DISADVANTAGES OF DIFFERENTIATION STRATEGY
Buyers are less price-sensitive
Costs to produce can be high
Rivalry is reduced (fewer direct competitors)
Distinctive features don’t necessarily create value
Difficult for new entrants into the market to copy the product or service
Distinctive features may be easily imitated
Uniqueness makes it hard to find substitutes
Distinction may be erased by innovation

Integrated Strategy
In today’s highly competitive market, customers expect distinction and low cost. Some companies have responded by adopting an integrated strategy. Porter originally argued that this integrated, or “stuck in the middle,” strategy would fail, but other researchers showed real-world examples. Later, Porter modified his view. The organizations strive to provide more value than the average competitor but also focus on keeping costs low. Examples of integrated strategy firms include the automobile companies who manufacture a “luxury” brand, such as the Kia K900. Kia keeps costs down by using many components of its low-cost models but adds additional features comparable to luxury car producers. This approach is risky, because these products run the risk of being too expensive for the economy-driven customer but not having the prestige of the classic luxury brands.
ADVANTAGES OF INTEGRATION STRATEGY
DISADVANTAGES OF INTEGRATION STRATEGY
Provides value to two types of customers
Very difficult to maintain
Forces out less efficient rivals
Possible dilution of brand identity and customer confusion

Practice Question
E-Business and E-Commerce
Businesses today need a strategy for competing with online “upstarts” who can underprice and steal customers. Companies that once thought they were immune to online competition have discovered that the Internet is biting into their profits. Warby-Parker is an online provider of eyeglasses that offers lenses at up to 70 percent off the price opticians charge. The customer only needs to choose frames, pick a lens, and enter the prescription. Returns are guaranteed. Even many routine medical procedures are being addressed digitally as patients meet online with doctors.
E-business can be defined as any business that takes place over digital processes using a computer network rather than in a physical location (“brick and mortar”). Organizations of all types, military and nonprofit, educational and governmental, use e-business strategies. The strategies are geared to three purposes:
those related to decreasing production costs and increasing efficiency.
those creating customer focus.
those addressing internal management.
E-commerce is a more limited term than e-business. It refers specifically to exchanges or transactions that occur electronically. The younger the shopper, the more likely he or she is to conduct “business” using a smart phone. E-commerce strategies rely on the power of the Internet, both in the growing popularity of online purchasing and in shaping marketing strategies. About 8.5 percent of all retail sales were made online in 2016 and this figure is increasing rapidly every year. Many organizations have sales and marketing teams dedicated to devising strategies for capturing their share of the growing online market. Amazon clearly dominates e-commerce with a whopping 33 percent of all online purchases. Its e-commerce strategy is “simply” to make it as easy as possible for the customer to find, order, pay, receive, and return (if necessary) the goods that it buys from the giant corporation. It doesn’t wait for the customer to search out a product, but rather pushes products to the customer based on past purchases.
Retailers and manufacturers also use the aspects of the internet such as Twitter, Facebook, and other social media sites to predict trends as they are developing to get a jump on production. First to market can be a key competitive advantage, in part because of the short life span of many fads. Many of the strategies needed to succeed in e-commerce are very different from competing in a nondigital environment. To survive today, organizations need to be present in both environments.
Practice Question
Candela Citations
CC licensed content, Original
Stages and Types of Strategy. Authored by: John/Lynn Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
Strategic Management Process. Authored by: John Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
Porter's Competitive Strategies. Authored by: John Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
How Environment Affects Strategy
Learning Outcomes
Explain the key aspects of the environment that can affect strategy (e.g., stability, complexity, resource scarcity, and uncertainty).
We’ve talked about how organizations use strategy to integrate their functions and activities. Strategy also integrates the firm with its external environment. This means that the structure of the firm must align with external conditions. The problem this presents is that the environment constantly changes and the firm has little control over the changes. Strategy and structure must be flexible to adapt to changes in the environment.

Strategy integrates the organization with its external environment.
Strategy and Change
To determine the appropriate strategic response to changes in the environment, managers must be able to understand the impact of the changes. There are four components that describe the nature of change in the environment: stability, complexity, resource scarcity, and uncertainty.
Stability
Stability refers to the rate at which change occurs. In a stable environment, change is slow. Managers have time to monitor and respond to changes in a deliberate manner. The grocery industry is relatively stable. A dynamic environment is changing rapidly. Managers must react quickly and organizations must be flexible to respond. Today’s business environment is generally very dynamic. Technology, consumer tastes, laws and regulations, political leaders, and international conditions are all changing rapidly and dramatically. Failure to monitor and respond to changing conditions often results in a company’s demise. Consider the Nokia example we introduced in an earlier section. Nokia was a market leader just a few years ago (2011). It didn’t respond quickly to the emergence of smartphones and has now been acquired by Microsoft. Or we can look at the example of True Religion Jeans, a market leader in fashion jeans very recently. It did not respond to the shift in consumer taste to casual sportswear and the company has filed for bankruptcy.
Complexity
Complexity refers to the number of elements in the organization’s environment and their connections. In a highly complex environment there are many variables that can affect the company. The variables are hard to identify and measure and are connected in ways that are hard to understand. Managers must monitor and respond to more sources of change, which makes it more difficult to make decisions. Complexity can be modeled with chaos theory, where small changes in one factor can produce a major change in another. For example, the failure of an Ohio power company to trim tree branches near its high-voltage lines lead to the biggest power blackout in US history, affecting more than 50 million people. Should GM, a global auto manufacturer, have anticipated that an increase in default rates on US home mortgages would begin a series of financial crises that would eventually lead to declaring bankruptcy?
Resource Scarcity
Resource scarcity refers to the availability of resources critical to a company or that are in high demand by other companies. Resource scarcity is usually the result of a shortage of supply, but it can also result from demand driving up prices. In conditions of resource scarcity, a company may not be able to acquire the resources it needs to operate or grow. For example, lithium ion batteries are now used extensively in electronic devices, tools, and electric cars. But lithium supplies are in a severe shortage and new sources are slow to arise. Tesla, the US electric car manufacturer, will require about one-third of the available lithium to supply its new battery factory. Its ambitious growth plans could be jeopardized if new sources are not developed.
Uncertainty
Instability, complexity, and resource scarcity all lead to uncertainty. Uncertainty refers to how predictable environmental conditions are. In an uncertain environment it is very difficult for managers to predict where and how change will occur. Instead, managers must make decisions based on assumptions rather than clear facts. Companies that “guess” right benefit from uncertainty and companies that guess wrong suffer. For example, in the 1990s when oil prices were around $50 per barrel, there was no clear information to predict what would happen in the near future. Southwest Airlines bet that fuel prices would go up and hedged against oil price increases. Other airlines bet that prices would be stable or decline. When oil prices soared to more than $100 per barrel, Southwest was able to remain profitable whereas other airlines lost more than $6 billion.
Practice Question
Summary 
Nothing stays the same. This simple fact underlies strategic management, which seeks to adapt to and benefit from change. However, in today’s environment, it is difficult for managers to identify and understand rapid or unexpected changes in the environment. Conditions of instability, complexity, resource scarcity, and uncertainty make it impossible for managers to anticipate change and make rational decisions. Instead, they must operate with incomplete data and base decisions on assumptions and best guesses. This makes good managers, who use their experience and training to guess right more often, even more important to organizations.
Candela Citations
CC licensed content, Original
How Environment Affects Strategy. Authored by: John/Lynn Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
Image: Strategy. Authored by: John Bruton and Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution

# swot
